# BioC 2016: Where Software and Biology Connect

June 25-26, 2016 (Developer Day: June 24)<br />
Stanford University, Stanford, CA<br />

This conference highlights current developments within and beyond
_Bioconductor_. Morning scientific talks and afternoon workshops
provide conference participants with insights and tools required for
the analysis and comprehension of high-throughput genomic
data. 'Developer Day' (optional <font color="red">developer day
closed</font>; registrations received after 2 June do not include
developer day) precedes the main conference on June 24, providing
developers and would-be developers an opportunity to gain insights
into project direction and software development best practices.

Speaker, workshop, and additional information coming soon. Travel and
accommodation are participant's responsibilities. For more
information, see [useR! 2016 Lodging][] for possible options.

Scholarship applications are now closed; successful applicants will be
notified on May 18.

## Important Dates

- May 31: Early Registration closes
  (optional <font color="red">developer day closed</font>;
  registrations received after 2 June do not include developer day).
- June 1: Developer Day Workshop and Lightning Talk Submission Opens
- June 24: Developer Day, [Clark Center][] Room S360.
- June 25 - 26: Main Conference, [Li Ka Shing Learning and Knowledge Center][]

## Registration

<p><font color="red">Registration Closed</font></p>

Attendees are responsible for travel and accommodation. Questions?
Mail to workshop at bioconductor.org.

## Afternoon Workshops

Workshops are two-hour, user-oriented sessions during the main
conference. See the [schedule](#schedule) and
[abstracts](#workshop-abstracts) below.

## Schedule

Friday June 24 -- Developer Day (optional) -- [Clark Center][] Room S360.

- Project updates
- Short developer-oriented workshops, e.g., 'My First Package', 'Using
  and Extending S4', 'Debugging C Code', 'Using Internet Resources in
  Packages', 'Unit Tests and other Programming Best Practices'.
- Contributed 'lightning' talks highlighting innovative and technical
  aspects of new packages
- Social activities
- Developer Day Keynote Address

    - Dr. Robert Gentleman, 23andMe. Distributed Content Generation
      and Creating Pipelines for Genomic Analysis.

Saturday, June 25 -- [Li Ka Shing Learning and Knowledge Center][]

- Speakers

  - 8:30 - 9:15. Sandrine Dudoit, Stanford University. Identification
    of Novel Cell Types in the Brain Using Single-Cell Transcriptome
    Sequencing.
  - 9:15 - 10:00. Susan Holmes. Multicomponent data integration for the
    Human Microbiome.
  - 10:00 - 10:30 BREAK
  - 10:30 - 11:15. Jenny Bryan, University of British
    Columbia. Spreadsheets: the Data Format we Love to Hate.

- Community Speakers

  - 11:15 - 11:30. Michael Love, Harvard TH Chan School of Public
    Health. _Bioconductor_ Workflows Following Fast, Lightweight RNA
    Transcript Quantifiers.
  - 11:30 - 11:45. Ramnath Vaidya, Alteryx. HtmlWidgets: The Power of
    Javascript in _R_!
  - 11:45 - 12:00. Benjamin Haibe-Kains, Princess Margaret Cancer
    Center / University of Toronto. Data Sharing and Research
    Reproducibility: Why and How.

- 1:00 - 2:50. Afternoon workshops, session 1.

  - Getting to know _R_ and _Bioconductor_. Valerie Obenchain, Lori
    Shepherd (Roswell Park Cancer Institute). Beginner.
  - Building and running automated NGS analysis workflows. Thomas
    Girke (UC Riverside). Intermediate.
  - Introduction to [ImmuneSpaceR][]. Renan Sauteraud, Lev Dashevskiy,
    Greg Finak, Raphael Gottardo (Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
    Center). Intermediate.
  - Analysis of single-cell RNA-seq data with R and
    _Bioconductor_. Davide Risso, Kelly Street, Michael Cole (UC
    Berkeley). Intermediate.
  - Writing efficient, scalable code. Martin Morgan (Roswell Park Cancer
    Institute). Intermediate.

- 3:10 - 5:00. Afternoon workshops, session 2.

  - Annotating high throughput data using _Bioconductor_
    resources. James MacDonald (University of Washington)
    Intermediate.
  - Interactive visualization with _epiviz_. H&eacute;ctor Corrada
    Bravo, Jayaram Kancherla, Justin Wagner, Deok Park (University of
    Maryland, College Park). Intermediate.
  - Single Cell Differential Expression and Gene Set Enrichment with
    MAST. Andrew McDavid, Raphael Gottardo, Greg Finak (Fred
    Hutchinson Cancer Research). Intermediate.
  - Managing big biological sequence data with [Biostrings][] and
    [DECIPHER][]. Erik Wright (UW, Madison). Intermediate.

Sunday, June 26 -- [Li Ka Shing Learning and Knowledge Center][]

- Speakers

  - 8:30 - 9:15. Rob Tibshirani, Stanford University. Some Recent
    Advances in Post-selection Statistical Inference.
  - 9:15 - 10:00. William Greenleaf, Department of Genetics and, by
    courtesy, Applied Physics, Stanford University.  ATAC-ing Open
    Chromatin Data Analysis.
  - 10:00 - 10:30 BREAK.
  - 10:30 - 11:15. Stephen Montgomery, Stanford
    University. Identifying Gene-by-Environment Variants in Studies of
    Gene Expression.

- Community Speakers

  - 11:15 - 11:30. Jim Hester, RStudio. Using Devtools, Travis and Git
    for _Bioconductor_ Package Development.
  - 11:30 - 11:45. Johannes Rainer, Center for Biomedicine, European
    Academy of Bozen/Bolzano (EURAC), Bolzano, Italy. Building and
    Using Ensembl Based Annotation Packages with ensembldb.
  - 11:45 - 12:00. Xiuwen Zheng, University of Washington, Seattle,
    WA, USA. SeqArray: Data Management of Whole-Genome Sequence
    Variant Calls with Thousands of Individuals.

- 1:00 - 2:50. Afternoon workshops, session 3

  - Low-level exploratory data analysis and methods development for
    RNA-seq. Michael Love (Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health).
    Intermediate.
  - Making your packages accessible to non-programmer collaborators
    using the VisRseq platform. Hamid Younesy (Simon Fraser
    University), Torsten M&ouml;ller (University of Vienna) Mohammad
    M. Karimi (University of British Columbia). Beginner.
  - The [MultiAssayExperiment][] class for analysis of multi-omics
    experiments. Levi Waldron, Marcel Ramos (presenter) (CUNY School
    of Public Health), Vince Carey (Brigham and Women's), Kasper
    Hansen (Johns Hopkins University), Martin Morgan (Roswell Park
    Cancer Institute). Intermediate.
  - Analyzing splice events from RNA-seq data with [SGSeq][]. Leonard
    Goldstein (Genentech, Inc.). Intermediate.
  - Hello Ranges: An Introduction to Analyzing Genomic Ranges in
    _R_. Michael Lawrence (Genentech, Inc.). Intermediate.

- 3:10 - 5:00. Afternoon workshops, session 4

  - Wrapping Your _R_ tools to Analyze National-Scale Cancer Genomics
    in the Cloud. Tengfei Yin, Nan Xiao (Seven Bridges Genomics).
    Beginner.
  - Analysing DNA methylation data with _Bioconductor_. Peter Hickey,
    Kasper Hansen (Department of Biostatistics, Johns Hopkins
    Bloomberg School of Public Health). Intermediate.
  - Introduction to Bayesian Inference using [Stan][] with
    Applications to Cancer Genomics. Jacqueline Buros (Icahn School of
    Medicine at Mount Sinai), Benjamin Goodrich (Columbia University),
    Eric Novik (Stan Group Inc.).  Intermediate.
  - _R_ / _Bioconductor_ tools for mass spectrometry-based
    proteomics. Laurent Gatto (University of Cambridge). Intermediate.

[Clark Center]: https://biox.stanford.edu/about/clark-center
[Li Ka Shing Learning and Knowledge Center]: http://med.stanford.edu/irt/about/maps-directions.html

[Registration]: https://cmetracker.net/RP/Login?formname=RegLoginLive&EventID=33505
[useR! 2016]: http://user2016.org/
[useR! 2016 Lodging]: http://user2016.org/#lodging

[ImmuneSpaceR]: https://bioconductor.org/packages/ImmuneSpaceR
[MAST]: https://bioconductor.org/packages/MAST
[Biostrings]: https://bioconductor.org/packages/Biostrings
[BiocParallel]: https://bioconductor.org/packages/BiocParallel
[DECIPHER]: https://bioconductor.org/packages/DECIPHER
[MultiAssayExperiment]: https://bioconductor.org/packages/MultiAssayExperiment
[SGSeq]: https://bioconductor.org/packages/SGSeq
[Stan]: http://mc-stan.org

## Workshop Abstracts

### Session 1

- Getting to know _R_ and _Bioconductor_. Valerie Obenchain, Lori
  Shepherd (Roswell Park Cancer Institute). Beginner. 
  
  This workshop introduces _R_ and _Bioconductor_, and is oriented
  toward the novice _Bioconductor_ user. Participants can expect to
  learn the essentials of _R_, including understanding basic data
  structures and navigating the help system. Participants will also be
  introduced to the breadth of packages available in _Bioconductor_,
  how to find packages that are relevant to their particular needs,
  and how to benefit from the particular resources (vignettes, work
  flows, online support forum) that characterize the _Bioconductor_
  community.

- Building and running automated NGS analysis workflows. Thomas Girke
  (UC Riverside). Intermediate. 
  
  The proposed workshop will introduce
  [systemPipeR](http://bioconductor.org/packages/devel/bioc/html/systemPipeR.html)
  as an environment for building and running complex analysis
  workflows for most NGS applications. This includes support for both
  command-line and R/Bioconductor software as well as resources for
  parallel evaluations on computer clusters along with automated
  generation of analysis reports in PDF and HTML formats. The event
  will cover the basic usage of so-called workflow design modules,
  construction of custom workflows, integration of external
  command-line software and automation routines for running NGS
  workflows from start to finish with a single command. The last part
  will demonstrate how to run a relatively complex sample workflow
  (_e.g._ Ribo-Seq and/or smallRNA-Seq) on large numbers of input
  samples (here FASTQ files) on both a single machine and a computer
  cluster with a scheduler.

- Introduction to [ImmuneSpaceR][]. Renan Sauteraud, Lev Dashevskiy,
  Greg Finak, Raphael Gottardo (Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
  Center). Intermediate.
  
  ImmuneSpace is the data portal of the Human Immunology Project
  consortium (HIPC). The HIPC program, funded by the NIH, is a
  multi-center collaborative effort to characterize the status of the
  immune system in different populations under diverse stimulations
  and disease states. This ongoing effort has generated large amounts
  of varied high-throughput, high-dimensional biological data (flow
  cytometry, CyTOF, RNA-Seq, Luminex, among others). All data
  generated to date by HIPC, along with other selected datasets
  generated by other NIAID funded projects, have been made publicly
  available through ImmuneSpace and are ready to be explored using
  visualization and analysis tools built in ImmuneSpace.  ImmuneSpaceR
  is a recently releasead package that aims to provide a fast and easy
  to use interface to download, manipulate and analyze data. In this
  workshop, we propose an introduction to the ImmuneSpaceR package,
  from instantiating connection to ImmuneSpace, to the visualization
  of normalized cross-study data. At the the end of this workshop, the
  users will be able to use the portal to get data of interest,
  combine ImmuneSpace data with other resources and write report that
  can be submitted to the ImmuneSpace team for addition to the
  website.  The participants are expected to have a basic knowledge of
  R and BioConductor's common data structures. Interested participants
  are encouraged to try the web portal first at www.immunespace.org

- Analysis of single-cell RNA-seq data with _R_ and _Bioconductor_. Davide
  Risso, Kelly Street, Michael Cole (UC Berkeley). Intermediate.
  
  In this workshop, we will show how to perform statistical analyses
  of single-cell RNA-seq data using R and Bioconductor. Starting from
  gene-level read counts, we will emphasize three important aspects of
  a typical workflow: (i) quality-control (QC) and normalization; (ii)
  cluster analysis and discovery of cell sub-populations; (iii)
  lineage analysis and pseudo-time cell ordering.  The participants
  will learn how to compute common metrics of QC that can be used for
  gene and sample filtering and normalization; how to discover new
  cell populations using the new package clusterExperiment (available
  on Github at http://github.com/epurdom/clusterExperiment and about
  to be submitted to Bioconductor) that takes full advantage of the
  SummarizedExperiment container; and how to order the cells in
  pseudo-time. The participants are expected to have some familiarity
  with RNA-seq and with the concepts of normalization and clustering,
  as well as with R and Bioconductor software.

- Writing efficient, scalable code. Martin Morgan (Roswell Park Cancer
  Institute). Intermediate.
  
  This workshop reinforces common patterns that lead to effcient and
  scalable _R_ and _Bioconductor_ code. We spend the first part
  discussing vectorization, measuring basic performance, and ensuring
  our results are consistent and correct. The second part explores
  approaches to parallel evaluation using the [BiocParallel][]
  package, including strategies for recovering from and debugging
  errors during parallel evaluation.

### Session 2

- Annotating high throughput data using _Bioconductor_
  resources. James MacDonald (University of Washington) Intermediate. 
  
  When analyzing high throughput data, there is usually a single
  (often cryptic) identifier for each thing being measured. When you
  want to present your results to collaborators, you will usually want
  to map that ID to something more familiar, such as a HUGO gene
  symbol, Entrez Gene ID, or similar. You may also need to map IDs to
  things like KeGG or Gene Ontology IDs for additional analyses.  The
  Bioconductor project has various annotation packages that are
  intended to simplify this process. In this workshop we will learn
  how to use these annotation packages using real-world examples.

- Interactive visualization with _epiviz_. H&eacute;ctor Corrada
  Bravo, Jayaram Kancherla, Justin Wagner, Deok Park (University of
  Maryland, College Park). Intermediate. 
  
  This workshop provides an overview of interactive visualization
  tools available through epivizr. It will be centered around analysis
  of epigenetic data using Bioconductor tools and annotation
  packages. After completion participants will be expected to be able
  to setup interactive visualization sessions through R, load data
  from diverse R / Bioconductor objects, including those provided by
  annotation infrastructure, interact with data using patterns
  provided by the epiviz user interface, and write scripts that can
  reproduce interactive visualization analyses. Some familiarity with
  Bioconductor infrastructure recommended.

- Single Cell Differential Expression and Gene Set Enrichment with
  MAST. Andrew McDavid, Raphael Gottardo, Greg Finak (Fred Hutchinson
  Cancer Research). Intermediate.
  
  We will learn how to use the package
  [MAST](http://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13059-015-0844-5)
  to analyze single cell gene expression experiments.  Starting from a
  matrix of counts of transcripts (cells by transcripts), we will
  discuss the preliminary steps of quality control, filtering, and
  exploratory data analysis.  Once we are satisfied that we have
  high-quality expression, we will consider tests for differential
  expression and ways to visualize results.  It is often helpful to
  synthesize from gene-level into module-level statements.  Therefore,
  we will learn how to use MAST to test for gene set enrichment.  An
  example data set of Mucosal Associated Invariant T cells (MAITs)
  that have been cytokine stimulated will be provided.  Participants
  are also encouraged to bring their own data.  Prerequisites for this
  class will include basic R syntax, plotting and manipulation of data
  using `data.table` and `ggplot2`.  Background with linear models may
  be useful as well.

- Managing big biological sequence data with [Biostrings][] and
  [DECIPHER][]. Erik Wright (UW, Madison). Intermediate.
  
  This workshop provides an introduction to using the *Biostrings* and
  *DECIPHER* packages to manage big biological sequence
  data. Participants will learn how to build a database of sequences,
  curate the database, extract sequences, manipulate sequences, run
  large-scale analyses in pieces, and perform other tasks with these
  two *R* packages.

### Session 3

- Low-level exploratory data analysis and methods development for
  RNA-seq. Michael Love (Harvard TH Chan School of Public
  Health). Intermediate. 
  
  Interested in exploring RNA-seq alignments in Bioconductor?
  Interested in developing RNA-seq methods in Bioconductor? In this
  workshop, we will cover the basic classes that are useful for
  working with RNA-seq data: paired alignments, exons, transcripts and
  genes, etc. We will also cover basic functionality useful for
  manipulating RNA-seq data: finding compatible overlaps between
  alignments and transcripts, mapping between genomic and
  transcriptomic coordinates, calculating coverage, visualizing gene
  structure, etc. As a motivating example, we will investigate the
  various kinds of bias that can be observed in RNA-seq data: random
  hexamer priming bias, positional bias, and GC content bias.  By
  "low-level", I mean that this workshop will *not* cover the basic
  workflow and statistical packages for analyzing summarized RNA-seq
  data, for example, count matrices.

- Making your packages accessible to non-programmer collaborators
  using the VisRseq platform. Hamid Younesy (Simon Fraser University),
  Torsten M&ouml;ller (University of Vienna) Mohammad M. Karimi
  (University of British Columbia). Beginner. 
  
  The goal of this workshop is to introduce the
  [VisRseq platform](http://visrseq.github.io/) and walk the
  participants through the quick process of creating modules called
  [R-apps](https://github.com/hyounesy/visr-apps) from their R
  packages. I expect this to be mostly useful for bioinformaticians
  and package developers that develop R-based analysis tools and would
  like to make them accessible to their non-programmer collaborators
  or to the public without having to spend time on creating extensive
  graphical user interfaces.  I will walk the participants through
  several examples of creating diverse types of apps, from simple
  plotting (e.g. ggplot) to intermediate (e.g. clustering) to more
  advanced (e.g. edgeR and DEseq) packages. I will also show how
  several R-apps can be linked together to create more complex
  workflows.  Participants will require having beginner/intermediate
  knowledge of R and a machine with R and Java installation.

- The [MultiAssayExperiment][] class for analysis of multi-omics
  experiments. Levi Waldron, Marcel Ramos (presenter) (CUNY School of
  Public Health), Vince Carey (Brigham and Women's), Kasper Hansen
  (Johns Hopkins University), Martin Morgan (Roswell Park Cancer
  Institute). Intermediate. 
  
  This workshop will introduce the MultiAssayExperiment data class for
  the analysis of multi-assay, or multi-omics, experiments.  This
  class provides a single data object to store and link both ID-based
  datasets (ie matrix and ExpressionSet) and range-based datasets (ie
  RangedSummarizedExperiment and GRangesList), with each other and
  with over-arching experiment-level metadata. These data objects are
  easy to create, and allow harmonized subsetting across genomic
  features, samples, and assays, using standard bracket notation and
  providing a consistent interface to diverse base data
  classes. Subsetting can be formed using gene/probeset identifiers or
  genomic ranges.  This workshop will be accessible to beginner
  Bioconductor users, although some familiarity with GenomicRanges
  will be helpful.  The workshop will cover how to create and
  manipulate a MultiAssayExperiment for various kinds of -omics data,
  and how to incorporate new data classes.

- Analyzing splice events from RNA-seq data with [SGSeq][]. Leonard
  Goldstein (Genentech, Inc.). Intermediate. 
  
  *SGSeq* is an *R/Bioconductor* package for analyzing annotated or
  previously uncharacterized splice events from short read RNA-seq
  data. Input data are sequence reads mapped to a reference genome in
  BAM format. Gene models are represented as a genome-wide splice
  graph, which can be obtained from transcript annotation or predicted
  from the data. Splice events are identified from the graph and are
  quantified locally using structurally compatible reads that span
  event boundaries. The workshop introduces *SGSeq* data structures
  and illustrates typical analysis workflows, including splice event
  prediction, quantification, visualization and interpretation.

- Hello Ranges: An Introduction to Analyzing Genomic Ranges in
  _R_. Michael Lawrence (Genentech, Inc.). Intermediate.
  
  Genomic ranges are central to the analysis of high-throughput
  genomic data, and Bioconductor provides an integrated platform for
  computing and annotating data like read alignments, variant calls,
  transcript models, coverage vectors, genomic assays, etc. Outside of
  Bioconductor, high-level applications like bedtools and bedops
  provide convenient interfaces to simple, common operations on
  genomic intervals. The Bioconductor Ranges API is comparatively more
  flexible, and more complex. Although simple operations often have
  simple solutions, those solutions are hidden within the
  complexity. A new package, HelloRanges, attempts to solve this
  problem by compiling bedtools invocations to R/Bioconductor
  code. The compiler outputs code that aims to be correct, reasonably
  efficient, and, importantly, pedagogical. The code promotes best
  practices and makes explicit some assumptions in the API that may be
  surprising. This tutorial will walk through common workflows in
  genomic data processing from the bedtools perspective, while
  students use HelloRanges to learn Bioconductor equivalents. Basic
  familiarity with data in BED, BAM and VCF files is assumed.

### Session 4

- Wrapping Your _R_ tools to Analyze National-Scale Cancer Genomics in
  the Cloud. Tengfei Yin, Nan Xiao (Seven Bridges Genomics). Beginner. 
  
  The Cancer Genomics Cloud (CGC), built by Seven Bridges and funded
  by the National Cancer Institute hosts The Cancer Genome Atlas
  (TCGA), that is one of the world's largest cancer genomics data
  collections. Computational resources and optimized, portable
  bioinformatics tools are provided to analyze the cancer data at any
  scale immediately, collaboratively, and reproducibly. Seven Bridges
  platform is not only available on AWS but also available on google
  cloud as well.  With Docker and Common Workflow Language open
  standard, wrapping a tool in any programming language into the cloud
  and compute on petabyte of data has never been so easy.  Open source
  R/Bioconductor package __sevenbridges__ is developed to provide full
  API support to Seven Bridges Platforms including CGC, supporting
  flexible operations on project, task, file, billing, apps etc, users
  could easily develop fully automatic workflow within R to do an
  end-to-end data analysis in the cloud, from raw data to
  report. What’s most important, __sevenbridges__ packages also
  provides interface to describe your tools in R and make it portable
  to CWL format in JSON and YAML, that you can share easily with
  collaborators, execute it in different environment locally or in the
  cloud, everything is fully reproducible. Combined with the R API
  client functionality, users will be able to create a CWL tool in R
  and execute it in the cancer genomics cloud to analyze the huge
  amount of cancer data at scale.
  
  In this workshop, you will learn the best practice to create command
  line interface for your R cwl tool and docker container, put
  bioconductor workflow in cwl and execute it in the cloud, use API
  client to do different operations for your account, and use the R
  interface to describe CWL tool/workflows.

- Analysing DNA methylation data with _Bioconductor_. Peter Hickey,
  Kasper Hansen (Department of Biostatistics, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg
  School of Public Health). Intermediate.
  
  DNA methylation is an epigenetic modification of DNA that is
  involved in the regulation of gene expression. Popular assays for
  studying DNA methylation are the Illumina 450k and EPIC microarrays,
  reduced-representation bisulfite-sequencing, and whole-genome
  bisulfite-sequencing, each of which has its own set of bioinformatic
  challenges. However, there are also common statistical themes, such
  as the strong spatial correlation of DNA methylation along the
  genome and that measurements from these assays are aggregates from a
  population of heterogeneous cells. The Bioconductor project
  currently includes 50 packages for
  [analysing DNA methylation data][]. This workshop will introduce
  some of these packages and help users identify appropriate tools and
  methodology for their own analyses.  The workshop presenters are
  developers of and contributors to several popular Bioconductor
  packages, including [minfi][] for analysing Illumina methylation
  microarrays and [bsseq][] for analysing whole-genome
  bisulfite-sequencing data.

- Introduction to Bayesian Inference using [Stan][] with Applications
  to Cancer Genomics. Jacqueline Buros (Icahn School of Medicine at
  Mount Sinai), Benjamin Goodrich (Columbia University), Eric Novik
  (Stan Group Inc.).  Intermediate. 
  
  This workshop will provide a background and introduction to Bayesian
  analysis using Stan and R interfaces to Stan. We will then work
  through 1-2 example applications in the area of cancer genomics.
  [Stan](http://mc-stan.org/) is a modern probabilistic programming
  language implementing full Bayesian statistical inference with MCMC
  sampling (NUTS, HMC), approximate Bayesian inference with
  variational inference (ADVI), and penalized maximum likelihood
  estimation with optimization (L-BFGS).  Potential applications
  include: * A model for mutation signature detection (cancer
  genomics) * A clonality deconvolution model (cancer genomics) *
  Evaluating (predictive) biomarkers for response to treatment (cancer
  genomics) * Analysis of RNA expression data (genomics) * Gene set
  enrichment analysis (genomics) Users should be familiar with basic
  probability theory and statistical methods.  Prior experience with R
  is essential. Knowledge of genomic data and cancer biology will help
  but is not at all required.  Following this workshop users will have
  a basic familiarity with Stan and
  [RStan](http://mc-stan.org/interfaces/rstan.html).  They will be
  able to code simple models in Stan and be familiar with the process
  for specifying and fitting complex models in Stan.

- _R_ / _Bioconductor_ tools for mass spectrometry-based
  proteomics. Laurent Gatto (University of Cambridge). Intermediate.
  
  In this workshop, we will use R/Bioconductor packages to explore,
  process, visualise and understand mass spectrometry-based proteomics
  data, starting with raw data, and proceeding with identification and
  quantitation data, discussing some of their peculiarities compared
  to sequencing data along the way. The participants will gain a
  general overview of Bioconductor packages for mass spectrometry and
  proteomics, and learn how to navigate raw data and reconstruct
  quantitative data. The workshop is aimed at a beginner to
  intermediate level, such as, for example, seasoned R users who want
  to get started with mass spectrometry and proteomics, or proteomics
  practitioners who want to familiarise themselves with R and
  Bioconductor infrastructure.

[analysing DNA methylation data]: https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/BiocViews.html#___DNAMethylation
[bsseq]: http://bioconductor.org/packages/bsseq/
[minfi]: http://bioconductor.org/packages/minfi/
