
<ul class="inline_list">
    <li><a href="#bioc-version">Using Bioconductor</a></li>
	<li><a href="#install-R">Install&nbsp;R</a></li>
	<li><a href="#install-bioconductor-packages">Install Packages</a></li> 
	<li><a href="#find-bioconductor-packages">Find Packages</a></li> 
	<li><a href="#update-bioconductor-packages">Update Packages</a></li> 
	<li><a href="#troubleshoot-bioconductor-packages">Troubleshoot Package Installations</a></li> 
	<li><a href="#why-biocLite">Why biocLite()?</a></li> 
	<li><a href="#preconfigured">Pre-configured Bioconductor</a></li> 
</ul>


<h2 id="bioc-version">Using <em>Bioconductor</em></h2>

The current release of Bioconductor is version
<%=config[:release_version] %>; it works with R version
<%=config[:r_version_associated_with_release]%>. Users of older R and
Bioconductor versions must update their installation to take advantage
of new features.

[Install](#install-R) the latest release of R, then get the latest version of
Bioconductor by starting R and entering the commands

    source("http://bioconductor.org/biocLite.R")
    biocLite()

Details, including instructions to
[install additional packages](#install-bioconductor-packages") and to
[update](#update-bioconductor-packages"),
[find](#find-bioconductor-packages"), and
[troubleshoot](#troubleshoot-bioconductor-packages") are provided
below.  A [devel](/developers/how-to/useDevel/) version of
Bioconductor is available. There are good
[reasons for using `biocLite()`](#why-biocLite) for managing
Bioconductor resources.

<h2 id="install-R">Install R</h2>

1. Download the most recent version of [R][].  The [R FAQs][] and the [R
Installation and Administration Manual][1] contain detailed instructions
for installing R on various platforms (Linux, OS X, and Windows being
the main ones).

[R]: http://www.r-project.org/
[R FAQs]: http://cran.r-project.org/faqs.html
[1]: http://cran.r-project.org/doc/manuals/R-admin.html

2. Start the R program; on Windows and OS X, this will usually mean
   double-clicking on the R application, on UNIX-like systems, type
   "R" at a shell prompt.
   
3. As a first step with R, start the R help browser by typing
   `help.start()` in the R command window. For help on any
   function, e.g. the "mean" function, type `? mean`.

<p class="back_to_top">[ <a href="#top">Back to top</a> ]</p>

<h2 id="install-bioconductor-packages">Install <em>Bioconductor</em> Packages</h2>

Use the `biocLite.R` script to install Bioconductor packages. To
install core packages, type the following in an R command window:

    source("http://bioconductor.org/biocLite.R")
    biocLite()

Install specific packages, e.g., "GenomicFeatures" and "AnnotationDbi", with

    biocLite(c("GenomicFeatures", "AnnotationDbi"))

The `biocLite()` function (in the BiocInstaller package installed by
the `biocLite.R` script) has arguments that change its default
behavior; type `?biocLite` for further help.

<p class="back_to_top">[ <a href="#top">Back to top</a> ]</p>

<h2 id="find-bioconductor-packages">Find <em>Bioconductor</em> Packages</h2>

Visit the [Workflows](/help/workflows/) page
and [software package list](/packages/release/BiocViews.html#___Software)
to discover available packages.

<p class="back_to_top">[ <a href="#top">Back to top</a> ]</p>

<h2 id="update-bioconductor-packages">Update Installed <em>Bioconductor</em> Packages</h2>

Bioconductor packages, especially those in the development branch, are
updated fairly regularly. To identify packages requiring update within
your version of Bioconductor, start a new session of R and enter

    source("http://bioconductor.org/biocLite.R")
	biocLite()                  ## R version 3.0 or later

Use the argument `ask=FALSE` to update old packages without being
prompted.  For older versions of `R`, use the command
`biocLite(NULL)`.  Read the help page for `?biocLite` for additional
details.

<h3>Upgrading installed <em>Bioconductor</em> packages</h3>

Some versions of R support more than one version of Bioconductor. To
use the latest version of Bioconductor for your version of R, enter

    source("http://bioconductor.org/biocLite.R")
	biocLite("BiocUpgrade")     ## R version 2.15 or later

Read the help page for `?BiocUpgrade` for additional details. Remember
that more recent versions of Bioconductor may be available if your
version of R is out-of-date.

<h3>Recompiling installed <em>Bioconductor</em> packages</h3>

Rarely, underlying changes in the operating system require ALL
installed packages to be recompiled for source (C or Fortran)
compatibility. One way to address this might be to start a new R
session and enter

    source("http://bioconductor.org/biocLite.R")
    pkgs <- rownames(installed.packages())
    biocLite(pkgs, type="source")

As this will reinstall all currently installed packages, it likely
involves a significant amount of network bandwidth and compilation
time. All packages are implicitly updated, and the cumulative effect
might introduce wrinkles that disrupt your work flow. It also requires
that you have the necessary compilers installed.

<p class="back_to_top">[ <a href="#top">Back to top</a> ]</p>

<h2 id="troubleshoot-bioconductor-packages">Troubleshoot Package Installations</h2>

Use the commands

    library(BiocInstaller)
	biocValid()             ## R version 3.0 or later

to flag packages that are either out-of-date or too new for your
version of Bioconductor. The output suggests ways to solve identified
problems, and the help page `?biocValid` lists arguments influencing
the behavior of the function.

<p class="back_to_top">[ <a href="#top">Back to top</a> ]</p>

<h2 id="why-biocLite">Why Use biocLite()?</h2>

`biocLite()` is the recommended way to install Bioconductor
packages. There are several reasons for preferring this to the
'standard' way in which R pacakges are installed via
`install.packages()`.

Bioconductor has a repository and release schedule that differs from R
(Bioconductor has a 'devel' branch to which new packages and updates
are introduced, and a stable 'release' branch emitted once every 6
months to which bug fixes but not new features are introduced).

A consequence of the mismatch between R and Bioconductor release
schedules is that the Bioconductor version identified by
`install.packages()` is sometimes not the most recent 'release'
available. For instance, an R minor version may be introduced some
months before the next Bioc release. After the Bioc release the users
of the R minor version will be pointed to an out-of-date version of
Bioconductor.

A consequence of the distinct 'devel' branch is that
`install.packages()` sometimes points only to the 'release'
repository, whereas Bioconductor developers and users wanting
leading-edge features wish to access the Bioconductor 'devel'
repository. For instance, the Bioconductor 3.0 release is available
for R.3.1.x, so Bioconductor developers and leading-edge users need to
be able to install the devel version of Bioconductor packages into the
same version (though perhaps different instance or at least library
location) of R that supports version 2.14 of Bioconductor.

An indirect consequence of Bioconductor's structured release is that
packages generally have more extensive dependencies with one another,
both explicitly via the usual package mechanisms and implicitly
because the repository, release structure, and Bioconductor community
interactions favor re-use of data representations and analysis
concepts across packages. There is thus a higher premium on knowing
that packages are from the same release, and that all packages are
current within the release.

These days, the main purpose of
`source("http://bioconductor.org/biocLite.R")` is to install and
attach the 'BiocInstaller' package.

In a new installation, the script installs the most recent version of
the BiocInstaller package relevant to the version of R in use,
regardless of the relative times of R and Bioconductor release
cycles. The BiocInstaller package serves as the primary way to
identify the version of Bioconductor in use

    > library(BiocInstaller)
    Bioconductor version 2.14 (BiocInstaller 1.14.2), ?biocLite for help

Since new features are often appealing to users, but at the same time
require an updated version of Bioconductor, the source() command
evaluated in an out-of-date R will nudge users to upgrade, e.g., in
R-2.15.3

    > source("http://bioconductor.org/biocLite.R")
    A new version of Bioconductor is available after installing the most
      recent version of R; see http://bioconductor.org/install

The `biocLite()` function is provided by BiocInstaller. This is a
wrapper around `install.packages`, but with the repository chosen
according to the version of Bioconductor in use, rather than to the
version relevant at the time of the release of R.

`biocLite()` also nudges users to remain current within a release, by
default checking for out-of-date packages and asking if the user would
like to update

    > biocLite()
    BioC_mirror: http://bioconductor.org
    Using Bioconductor version 2.14 (BiocInstaller 1.14.2), R version
      3.1.0.
    Old packages: 'BBmisc', 'genefilter', 'GenomicAlignments',
      'GenomicRanges', 'IRanges', 'MASS', 'reshape2', 'Rgraphviz',
      'RJSONIO', 'rtracklayer'
    Update all/some/none? [a/s/n]:
    
The BiocInstaller package provides facilities for switching to the
'devel' version of Bioconductor

    > BiocInstaller::useDevel()
    Installing package into ‘/home/mtmorgan/R/x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu-library/3.1’
    (as ‘lib’ is unspecified)
    trying URL 'http://bioconductor.org/packages/3.0/bioc/src/contrib/BiocInstaller_1.15.5.tar.gz'
    Content type 'application/x-gzip' length 14144 bytes (13 Kb)
    opened URL
    ==================================================
    downloaded 13 Kb
    
    * installing *source* package ‘BiocInstaller’ ...
    ...
    Bioconductor version 3.0 (BiocInstaller 1.15.5), ?biocLite for help
    'BiocInstaller' changed to version 1.15.5
    
(at some points in the R / Bioconductor release cycle use of 'devel'
requires use of a different version of R itself, in which case the
attempt to `useDevel()` fails with an appropriate message).

The BiocInstaller package also provides `biocValid()` to test that the
installed packages are not a hodgepodge from different Bioconductor
releases (the 'too new' packages have been installed from source
rather than a repository; regular users would seldom have these).

    > biocValid()
    
    * sessionInfo()
    
    R version 3.1.0 Patched (2014-05-06 r65533)
    Platform: x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu (64-bit)
    ...
    
    * Out-of-date packages
    ...
    update with biocLite()
    
    * Packages too new for Bioconductor version '3.0'
    ...
    downgrade with biocLite(c("ShortRead", "BatchJobs"))
    
    Error: 9 package(s) out of date; 2 package(s) too new
    
For users who spend a lot of time in Bioconductor, the features
outlined above become increasingly important and `biocLite()` is much
preferred to `install.packages()`.

<p class="back_to_top">[ <a href="#top">Back to top</a> ]</p>

<h2 id="preconfigured">Pre-configured <em>Bioconductor</em></h2>

Bioconductor is also available as a set of 
[Amazon Machine Images (AMIs)](/help/bioconductor-cloud-ami/) and
[Docker images](/help/docker/).



<p class="back_to_top">[ <a href="#top">Back to top</a> ]</p>
