# Google Summer of Code Ideas List for 2014

This page is the main information point for Bioconductors participation
in the Google summer of Code project this year (2014).

## Overview

Each selected student (mentee) will be paid USD $5500 to work on a
Bioconductor project for 3 months during the summer.

Students should look at the list of projects and see if any project
interests them. Email the project mentors to express your interest,
and describe any prior experience.

Students with ideas for Bioconductor projects not listed below are
encouraged to email any of the mentors listed below with project
ideas.

Students will submit project applications directly to
[Google](http://www.google-melange.com/gsoc/homepage/google/gsoc2014).

Google will award a certain number of student slots to the
Bioconductor project.

The Bioconductor administrators and mentors will rank projects in order of
importance to the project, and the top projects will be funded.

Any selected students will be expected to register with the
bioconductor and bioc-devel [mailing lists](/help/mailing-list/).

There is a
[timeline](http://www.google-melange.com/gsoc/events/google/gsoc2014)
posted at Google explaining how this works.  Students are encouraged
to look at this and make sure that they can commit to this.  There is
also a
[FAQ](http://www.google-melange.com/gsoc/document/show/gsoc_program/google/gsoc2014/help_page)
in case people have other questions that are not addressed here.

# Here are our suggested ideas:





## ExperimentHub project

Background/Motivation: As very large genomic data sets become more and
more common, computational biologists are spending inordinate time
transforming data from the format of the original resource to a format
amenable to computation in their programming language of choice. The R
/ Bioconductor community needs programmatic access to cloud-based
experimental data resources that can be readily incorporated into
their own work flows.

### Goal

[AnnotationHub](/help/annotationhub/) and its supporting packages are
primed to support such a project.  AnnotationHub provides
infrastructure to make well-curated resources available to R software
clients, but it needs the addition of a GUI interface to allow
addition of user-supplied resources, including transformation of data
into formats amenable to direct use by R clients.


### The task

Work with us to create a GUI interface that does the following:

1) allows the user to add large genomic resources that have been
transformed into a [GenomicRanges](/packages/release/bioc/html/GenomicRanges.html)::GRanges object along with their associated metadata to a
NOSQL back-end database.
2) provides an intuitive front end using a shiny method that allows the user
to upload the object that was passed in to the method up to the DB
3) checks and validates that all the metadata has been filled in
appropriately when the shiny GUI is being run and then uploads that to the DB.
4) on the back end, enable a new instance of the AnnotationHubServer
that knows how to listen for requests from the GUI and can add the
data when appropriate.
5) Once the method and back end are both working for [GenomicRanges](/packages/release/bioc/html/GenomicRanges.html)::GRanges objects, you should also write methods for other popular Bioconductor objects such as:
[Biobase](/packages/release/bioc/html/Biobase.html)::ExpressionSet, 
[GenomicRanges](/packages/release/bioc/html/GenomicRanges.html)::SummarizedExperiment,  
[GenomicRanges](/packages/release/bioc/html/GenomicRanges.html)::GrangesList.


### Skills required

Familiarity with R S4 methods and with shiny.

### Test (to help you get started and also to indicate your competence)

* Subscribe to the mailing lists for bioconductor and bioc-devel.

* Create a basic S4 method similar to what you can see in the
[interactiveDisplay](http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/interactiveDisplay.html)
package.  Focus on the method for data.frames since it is the simplest
to understand.  Your method will be conceptually similar to this.
Except in this case, instead of the focus being on displaying the
object, this method should be intended to allow the user to collect
metadata from the user about the Title, Species, TaxonomyId and Genome
and then send a message back to the user R session that contains this
information along with the object itself.  The method should take a
GRanges object as an argument and then should launch a simple GUI to
extract information from the user (or even better-from the object
itself), and then return that data to the user.


### Mentor

Marc Carlson <mcarlson@fhcrc.org>  


### Backup Mentors

Dan Tenenbaum <dtenenba@fhcrc.org> 
Martin Morgan <mtmorgan@fhcrc.org>




## Enabling Interactivity in Reproducible Reports

### Background / Motivation
Every scientific analysis should result in a reproducible report. The
ReportingTools Bioconductor package provides multiple means of report
generation, including an imperative API driven by an R script, as well
as a declarative interface through knitr. ReportingTools converts
common R/Bioconductor data structures like data.frames and
ExpressionSets into report elements, such as tables and plots,
according to user-definable mappings. It supports multiple backends,
with the HTML backend being the most developed. The HTML report
elements have some limited interactivity (such as sortable
tables). Additional interactivity is enabled through integration with
the shiny package.

Our goal is to add some simple interactive HTML report elements, where
the interactivity is implemented in the front-end, independent of
shiny or other R instance. These would include basic plots of
summaries, as well as simple genomic plots, which would display
alignments, per-position summaries, and annotations along the genome.
Summarized data could be directly embedded in the report, and the
client would access large datasets by querying standard biological
data sources like DAS, AnnotationHub, ExperimentHub and web-accessible
BAM/VCF/BigWig files. This work would occur in a new or at least
separate package that could be used directly, or through its
integration with ReportingTools. We may be able to leverage existing
work like clickme and Rcharts for the low-level plotting. The genomic
plotting might rely on and even drive the development of the
[pViz](https://github.com/Genentech/pviz) javascript library.

The goal is for simple, lightweight plots in redistributable
reports. There is no intent for this to replace the more sophisticated
shiny-based solutions, nor applications like epiviz(R).

### Tasks

* Subscribe to the [mailing lists](http://www.bioconductor.org/help/mailing-list/) for bioconductor and bioc-devel.
* Install and explore the [ReportingTools](http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/2.12/bioc/html/ReportingTools.html) package from Bioconductor.
* Gather specific use cases of ReportingTools, including the common types of embedded plots and the types of questions readers want to ask of them.
* Familiarize yourself with web front-end technologies like [d3.js](http://d3js.org/), [backbone.js](http://backbonejs.org/), and [bower](http://bower.io/). 
* Propose a design for the geneneration of some simple summary plots, such as scatterplots, density plots, boxplots, and barcharts, with canonical interactions like tooltips, pan/zoom, and linked selection.
* After discussions with mentors, implement a prototype of the system.
* Solicit feedback from members of the Bioconductor community.
* Given positive feedback, solidify the implementation.
* (Stretch goal) Design, prototype and implement a genomic plot that draws alignments and annotations from web-accessible data repositories.

### Skills required

* Proficiency in Javascript and web technologies like those listed above.
* Familiarity with R; having publicly released an R package would be a plus.
* Exposure to biological/sequencing use cases is a plus.

### Mentors

Michael Lawrence lawrence.michael@gene.com

### Backup Mentors

Martin Morgan <mtmorgan@fhcrc.org> 
Marc Carlson <mcarlson@fhcrc.org>






## Extending mzR

### Introduction

The mzR R/Bioconductor package provides a unified application
programming interface to the common open and community-driven file
formats and parsers available for mass spectrometry data, namely
mzXML, mzML and mzData (see current [vignette](http://bioconductor.org/packages/devel/bioc/vignettes/mzR/inst/doc/mzR.pdf) for details and
references). It relies on C and C++ code from other third party
open-source projects and the Rcpp package to, notably, provide a
direct mapping from R to C++ infrastructure.

Currently, mzR provides two back-ends to read mass spectrometry raw
data:

* netCDF which reads, as the name implies, netCDF data
* RAMP to read mzData and mzXML via the ISB RAMP parser. This back-end
  can also read mzML through the proteowizard RAMPadapter around the
  proteowizard infrastructure, but this interface is limited to the
  lowest common denominator between the mzXML/mzData/mzML formats.

More details about the project can be found on the [official package
page](http://bioconductor.org/packages/devel/bioc/html/mzR.html). 

### Goal

The goal is to extend current useful, yet limited capabilities of mzR
by adding support for the state-of-the-art [proteowizard](http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net/) project.  

### The tasks

We will provide example data in all formats and support on the
domain. This project will use the [mzR github page](https://github.com/sneumann/mzR) as main
collaboration and communication hub.

* Subscribe to the Bioconductor and Bioc-devel mailing lists.

* Give us your github account to be added as a mzR collaborator on the
  github page.

* Install and explore the mzR and Rcpp packages and the proteowizard
  project. We will provide simple tasks to be coded in C++ using the
  proteowizard code base to familiarise yourself.

* Expand mzR on raw data and meta-data accession using the
  proteowizard 'msdata' object type. This will allow read and write
  support for the widely used Proteomics Standards Initiative
  XML-based raw data formats and their latest definitions.

* Implement support for additional open formats, in particular the
  MSMS identification (mzIdentML) using the 'identdata' object type.

* Ensure successful compilation of the updated mzR package on the
  respective architectures.

###  Skills needed: 
* Good knowledge of C/C++ and the Rcpp package.
* R programming.
* Basic knowledge of package development and S4 OO programming.
* Knowledge with mass spectrometry data and the respective formats is
  desired.

The candidate will have to familiarise herself proteowizard code base.

### Mentors

Laurent Gatto <lg390@cam.ac.uk>

### Backup mentors: 

Steffen Neuman <sneumann@ipb-halle.de>
Dirk Eddelbuettel <edd@debian.org>