# Google Summer of Code Ideas List for 2013

This page is the main information point for Bioconductors participation
in the Google summer of Code project this year (2013)

## Overview

Each selected student (mentee) will get paid USD$5000 to work on a
Bioconductor project for 3 months during the summer.

Students should look at the list of projects and see if any
project interests them. If so, email the project mentors to
express your interest, and describe any prior experience.

Students with ideas for Bioconductor projects not listed below are
still encouraged to email any of the mentors listed below with project
ideas.

Students will submit project applications directly to
Google](http://www.google-melange.com/gsoc/homepage/google/gsoc2013).

Google will award a certain number of student slots to the
Bioconductor project.

The Bioconductor administrators and mentors will rank projects in order of
importance to the project, and the top projects will be funded.

Any selected students will be expected to register with the
bioconductor and bioc-devel [mailing lists](/help/mailing-list/).

There is also a
[timeline](http://www.google-melange.com/gsoc/events/google/gsoc2013)
posted at Google explaining how this all works.  Students are
encouraged to look at this and make sure that they can commit to this.

And there is also a
[FAQ](http://www.google-melange.com/gsoc/document/show/gsoc_program/google/gsoc2013/help_page)
in case people have other questions that are not addressed here.


# Here are our suggested ideas:

## ExperimentHub project

Background/Motivation:  As very large genomic datasets become 
more and more common, computational biologists are spending 
inordinate time transforming data from the format of the original
resource to a format amenable to computation in their programming
language of choice. The R / Bioconductor community needs programmatic
access to cloud-based experimental data resources that can be readily 
incorporated into their own work flows.  

### Goal:

[AnnotationHub](/help/annotationhub/) 
and its supporting packages are  primed to support such a project. 
AnnotationHub provides infrastructure to make well-curated resources
available to R software clients, but it needs the addition of a web
interface to allow addition of user-supplied resources, including
transformation of data into formats amenable to direct use by R clients.

### Specific Aim:

Work with us to create a web accessible interface
that does the following: 

1. allows the user to add large genomic
resources and associated metadata to a NOSQL back-end database. 
2. transform genomic resources into R / Bioconductor data structures to
simplify end-user access via existing AnnotationHub infrastructure. For instance, the user might select from a list of 'recipes' (functions which 
transform raw data into a serialized R object) and/or contribute their own
recipes for data transformation. In addition, the project might
3. allow users to upload literate programming documents illustrating the use of
their data, and the documents' code would be evaluated by the web application,
reporting any errors, and 4) implement social networking concepts like tags
and rating systems to help guide users to the most useful resources.

### Skills required:

Familiarit­y with R and with AJAX Web 2.0 programming.

### Test: 

Using the R packages 
[Rook](http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/Rook/index.html) 
and
[rmongodb](http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/rmongodb/index.html),
write a web form that asks the user
for their name and age and stores this information in a MongoDB collection. A
second page asks the user for an age and then displays all records for people
that age or older. This should be sent to us as an R package so that all we 
have to do (once we've installed MongoDb) is install the package and run:

    library(testPkg)
    run()

..and we'll see the desired functionality.


### Mentors: 

Dan Tenenbaum <dtenenba@fhcrc.org>  Marc Carlson <mcarlson@fhcrc.org>

### Backup Mentor: 

Martin Morgan <mtmorgan@fhcrc.org>


## Shiny Bioconductor Objects Project

### Background/Motivation:

The [Shiny](http://shiny.rstudio.org/)
package allows for the easy creation of 
interactive web graphics from plots of R objects.  On the other hand, the 
Bioconductor project has many valuable data objects that represent biological 
data or results.  And for each of these Bioconductor objects, there exists a 
typical set of visualizations that users will normally want to plot.  Normally, 
these visuals are replotted several times until certain parameters are tweaked 
to show the image in a way that conveys a specific finding.  But now thanks to 
the introduction of Shiny, it is possible to pair some of these standard 
Bioconductor objects with nicer “Shiny” visualizations via new display()
methods.



### Tasks: 

* Subscribe to the mailing lists for bioconductor and bioc-devel 
[mailing lists](/help/mailing-list/)
* Using the mailing lists (which are searchable 
[here](/help/mailing-list/) and also the 
documentation from within the following packages familiarize yourself with the 
following Bionductor objects: 
[Biobase](/packages/release/bioc/html/Biobase.html)::ExpressionSet, 
[GenomicRanges](/packages/release/bioc/html/GenomicRanges.html)::SummarizedExperiment, 
[GenomicRanges](/packages/release/bioc/html/GenomicRanges.html)::GRanges, 
[GenomicRanges](/packages/release/bioc/html/GenomicRanges.html)::SummarizedExperiment,
[GenomicRanges](/packages/release/bioc/html/GenomicRanges.html)::GRanges, 
[GenomicRanges](/packages/release/bioc/html/GenomicRanges.html)::GrangesList.


You will also explore the following topics:

* How to annotate a set of IDs (see the vignette
[here](/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/AnnotationDbi/inst/doc/IntroToAnnotationPackages.pdf)).
* How to use [ggbio](/packages/release/bioc/html/ggbio.html)
to draw a generic display from the GRanges or GRangesList 
objects. 


Create display() methods for each of the four object types mentioned above.  
These methods should use Shiny to display a multi-tabbed version of each of the 
objects in question where each tab offers an alternate view of the object in 
question.  Each method should allow the caller to view a table of annotations in
one tab and to also visualize the data using either a heat map or a Gviz plot (
as appropriate) in another tab.


Make sure that your R code to draws these 4 very similar methods is written in
such a way so that you don't repeat yourself all the time.

Integrate these tests into the appropriate bioconductor packages along with 
proper documentation.  Which package is appropriate will be determined later as
the project develops.

Skills required: Familiarity with R.  Understanding of basic computational 
biology or an willingness/ability to learn about such things as needed.

### Test:  

Find the example from the manual page for Biobase::ExpressionSet, and run it. 
And then plot the relevant data contained in the generated ExpressionSet object 
as a heatmap and save the output.  Then send me the plot.  BONUS: make sure 
that all the labels in your plot are fully visible.


### Mentors:  

Marc Carlson <mcarlson@fhcrc.org>,  Michael Lawrence <lawrence.michael@gene.com>

### Backup Mentor: 

Martin Morgan <mtmorgan@fhcrc.org>


