<!--
%\VignetteEngine{knitr::knitr}
%\VignetteIndexEntry{}
-->

<!--
To deploy this to the website, do the following:
library(knitr)
render_markdown(strict=TRUE)
knit("2014_July.Rmd")

This will produce an .md file that can be used 
on the website. The {:toc} and {:no_toc} tags
will be rendered by nanoc, the tool that produces
the website.
-->

{::options parse_block_html="true" /}

# *Bioconductor* Newsletter
{:.no_toc}

posted by [Valerie Obenchain](mailto:vobencha@fhcrc.org), July 2014

## Contents
{:.no_toc}

* Table of contents will replace this text.
{:toc}


## Software Infrastructure

### `BSgenome` packages 2bit conversion

Current use cases for BSgenome packages emphasize quering many smaller
regions across the entire genome, e.g., assembling many transcript
sequences from the underlying coding sequence genomic ranges. To
efficiently enable this use case, many BSgenome data packages are now
using the UCSC 2bit format to store the sequences on disk.

One limitation of the 2bit format is that it does not support genomes
that contain letters other than As, Cs, Gs, Ts, or Ns. These genomes
(e.g. hg17, hg18, GRCh38, Ecoli, TAIR.04232008, and TAIR.TAIR9) use
the previous .rda storage format, with fast whole-chromosome access
but somewhat slower but still very usable random access.

The 2bit format is currently available in devel, but will be part of
the next release of Bioconductor.  Herv&eacute; and Martin worked on
this project with thanks to Michael for supporting the 2bit format in
`rtracklayer`.

### `S4 Vectors` package

In April Herv&eacute; started to split out the low level functions 
from `IRanges` and move them to the new `S4Vectors` package.
`IRanges` had grown to 90 classes, 157 generics and 844 methods
and was becoming difficult to maintain. The plan is to move
code that does not involve ranges, e.g., the `Vector` and
`List` virtual classes, and `DataFrame`, `Rle` and `Hits` 
concrete classes. This is a work in progress and estimated to be 
about 30% done.

### pileups

Nate has been working on a `pileup()` function which computes
pileup statistics in BAM files. Design goals were versatile 
record filtering and flexible presentation of results for 
downstream analyses. Filtering is achieved through the 
`ScanBamParam` and `PileupParam` objects; output is a 
`data.frame` with variable columns based on the filtering applied. 

`pileup()` is available in the `Rsamtools` package in devel. Other 
`Bioconductor` packages that offer pileup-like functions include `gmapR` 
(bam_tally), `deepSNV` (bam2R) and `Rsubread` (featureCounts). All 
have slightly different input requirements and output formats, see 
the man pages for details.

### Git-SVN Bridge

The `Bioconductor` project uses a Subversion (SVN) source control
system. SVN is effective for version control but does not offer 
social coding features such as GitHub's issue tracking, pull 
requests or ease in granting permissions.

In response to popular request, Dan created the Git-SVN Bridge 
to allow Github repositories to sync with the `Bioconductor` 
SVN repository. Commits made in SVN are propagated to GitHub and 
vice versa. The service has been well received, with 73 bridges 
created as of June 2014.

To create a bridge see the Git-SVN Bridge 
[HOWTO](http://bioconductor.org/developers/how-to/git-svn/).

### Bioconductor Amazon Machine Image (AMI)

The Bioconductor AMI has been overhauled and is now compatible with
[StarCluster](http://star.mit.edu/cluster/). These enhancements make
it straightforward to spin up a cluster with nodes that communicate 
via MPI, SSH or Sun Grid Engine. Details available at
[the AMI page](http://www.bioconductor.org/help/bioconductor-cloud-ami/#using_cluster).

The process of creating the AMI has been automated using Vagrant
and Chef. Our scripts are 
[publicly available](https://github.com/Bioconductor/setup-starcluster-image),
and can be used to provision an AMI, or a virtual machine (using Virtualbox 
or VMware) or even a physical machine.


## Education and Outreach

### Web site re-design

The `Bioconductor` home page now has what we hope is a more
intuitive and user friendly interface. The 'Install', 
'Learn', 'Use' and 'Develop' fields organize resources for 
the novice through the advanced developer.

Have a look at the new 
[design](http://www.bioconductor.org/).

### biocViews

Sonali continued her work on biocViews this quarter. A new function,
`recommendBiocViews()` is available in the `biocViews` package.  The
function looks at words in the DESCRIPTION, man pages and vignette,
and suggests possible terms for use in the `biocViews:` field of
package DESCRIPTION files. The function also identifies invalid
biocViews terms (e.g., mis-spellings) present in the package
DESCRIPTION file.

`recommendBiocViews()` has been incorporated into the Single Package
Builder that checks new package submissions; new package authors are
encouraged to run it before submitting a package. Remember that biocViews 
are case-sensitive and branch-sensitive (i.e., terms for a Software 
package must come from the Software branch of biocViews). 

Sonali distributed recommended views for all devel software packages
to the mailing list in June. For the complete list see this
[post](https://stat.ethz.ch/pipermail/bioc-devel/2014-June/005854.html).

### Instructional videos

We are looking into short, single-topic videos as an interactive complement 
to traditional vignettes and workflows.

The plan is to create a series of 5 minute videos that encapsulate a 
HOWTO skill or overview a project aspect. You can tour the website with 
Dan or do a 'quick start' with Martin's overview of key packages and classes.
Watch Marc slice and dice an AnnotationDb object or read BAM and VCF files 
with Sonali and Valerie. 

Sonali and Martin have led this effort and plan to unveil the first videos 
at BioC 2014 in Boston.


## Build System

### Branching the experimental data Subversion repository

Historically, only the Subversion repository for the `Bioconductor` software
packages had a distinct branch for each release. Subversion repositories for
experimental data and annotation packages had a trunk with no branches.

Starting with the Spring 2014 release a branch was created in the Subversion
repository for the experimental data. The motivation was to allow software and 
experimental data packages to evolve together in release and devel build 
environments. It was often the case that updates to a software package broke 
the companion experimental data. Changes made to the experimental data were 
committed to trunk and propagated to both release and devel builds creating 
incompatibilities in one place or the other.

A consequence of creating the new branch is the need to bump 'y' of
the 'x.y.z' 
[version numbering scheme](http://master.bioconductor.org/developers/package-guidelines/#versions)
 at release time (as we do for software). The Annotations have not changed; 
they are not under Subversion, do not go through automated builds and do not 
have a version policy.

Changes in how the experimental data Subversion repository is manged are 
relevant for developers only. The public repositories remain the same with 
a separate repository for each `Bioconductor` version. There is no visible 
change for users accessing the public repositories.

### New Mac OS X Mavericks build machines

An `R` 3.1.0 binary for Mac OS X 10.9 (Mavericks) is now available from
R Core. This `R` as been built with Xcode 5 to leverage new compilers and 
functionalities in Mavericks not available in earlier OS X versions.

To provide compatible `Bioconductor` package binaries we needed new
build machines. Dan has configured two new Mavericks, 
one in [release](http://www.bioconductor.org/checkResults/release/bioc-LATEST/)
(morelia) and one in 
[devel](http://www.bioconductor.org/checkResults/devel/bioc-LATEST/)
(oaxaca).

The introduction of Xcode and the clang compiler resulted in new 
errors for packages with C and C++ code. Nate and Dan spent many
hours troubleshooting with package authors and came up with a list 
of common problems and solutions. Lessons learned were 
distilled into the 
[C++/Mavericks Best Practices](/developers/how-to/mavericks-howto/)
document.


## Quarterly Project Statistics

There were 86953 downloads of `Bioconductor` software packages
over the past quarter (April - June). During this time 41 new software 
packages were accepted. A full summary of package download stats is
available [here](http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/stats/).

The web site saw approximately 119,000 visitors (26% increase from the 
previous year) from 180 countries, with the US, China, United Kingdom, 
Germany, and Canada at the head of the pack. 


## Resources, Courses and Conferences

### Data Analysis for Genome Biology (CSAMA)

This one week intensive course is offered each year in Brixen-Bressanone,
Italy and focuses on statistical and computational analysis of large-scale 
biological experiments. The course is intended for researchers with basic 
familiarity with the experimental technologies and who are interested in 
developing their own advanced data analyses.

Topics this year included RNASeq differential expression, variant calling 
and ChIP-Seq as well as the essentials of statistical testing, machine 
learning, visualization and of course using R. Michael Lawrence presented 
a `Scalable Genomics` lab which covered topics of limiting resource 
consumption, using iteration when appropriate, and scaling genome graphics. 
Much of the material is based on 
[a manuscript](http://www.e-publications.org/ims/submission/STS/user/submissionFile/16331?confirm=d92def1e)
currently in press at the journal Statistical Science.

Materials from the June 2014 course are available on the 
[web](http://bioconductor.org/help/course-materials/2014/CSAMA2014).

### Community Resources

New [Community Resources](http://bioconductor.org/help/community/) links
include the book and lab from  MOOC: PH525x Data Analysis for Genomics.
This online course was offered in April 2014 by Rafael Irizarry and Michael 
Love. Course goals were to enable students to analyze and interpret data 
generated by modern genomics technology, specifically microarray and next 
generation sequencing. Applications included gene expression, association 
of genomic variants to disease, and measuring epigenetic marks.

Also on the Community page are links to YouTube videos made by community
members, tips on getting started with R/Bioconductor by Thomas Girke, 
analysis of 23andme data by Vince Buffalo and Sean Davis' R/Bioconductor 
blog.

### BioC 2014

The annual meeting is in Boston this year (July 30 - August 1). See the
[web site](http://www.bioconductor.org/help/course-materials/2014/BioC2014/)
for a list of speakers and workshops.

Please send comments or questions to Valerie at 
[vobencha@fhcrc.org](vobencha@fhcrc.org).
