# BioC 2017: Where Software and Biology Connect

July 27-28, 2017 (Developer Day: July 26)<br />
Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA<br />

This conference highlights current developments within and beyond
_Bioconductor_. Morning scientific talks and afternoon workshops
provide conference participants with insights and tools required for
the analysis and comprehension of high-throughput genomic
data. 'Developer Day' precedes the main conference on July 26,
providing developers and would-be developers an opportunity to gain
insights into project direction and software development best
practices. 

# Registration

[Registration open][registration]!

Before July 1:

- Academic and not-for-profit: $300
- Commercial: $400

After July 1:

- Academic and not-for-profit: $600
- Commercial: $800

Scholarships

- Covers travel, shared accomodation, and registration fees.
- Applications closed; successful applicants will be informed by 26 June.

Accommodation

- The Inn at Longwood, 342 Longwood Ave, Boston, MA 02115. Mention
  _Bioconductor_ conference. $229 / night. Cut off date: July 4, 2017.
- [Courtyard Marriott Brookline][], 40 Webster St, Brookline Ave. $229
  / night. Cut off date: July 7, 2017.

[Courtyard Marriott Brookline]: http://www.marriott.com/meeting-event-hotels/group-corporate-travel/groupCorp.mi?resLinkData=Dana%20Farber%20Bioconductor%5EBOSBL%60DFBDFBA%60229%60USD%60false%601%607/26/17%607/27/17%607/7/17&app=resvlink&stop_mobi=yes

## Call for papers

Submission deadline: July 3rd. 

Following from last year, [F1000Research / Bioconductor][] encourage
conference presenters and participants to contribute Bioconductor work
flows or packages. Authors can submit directly in [Overleaf][] or take
advantage of the [BiocWorkflowTools][] package.  If you are interested
in contributing or have any other questions, please email
research@f1000.com.

[BiocWorkflowTools]: https://bioconductor.org/packages/BiocWorkflowTools
[Overleaf]: https://www.overleaf.com/latex/templates/f1000research-software-tool-article-template/wcbcqgcryfzk#.WOUcaWe1vcs
[F1000Research / Bioconductor]: https://f1000research.com/channels/bioconductor/about-this-channel

## Call for proposals

- Present a [poster][poster-proposal].

[registration]: https://goo.gl/ZqNs2O
[apply-scholarship]: https://www.surveymonkey.com/r/bioc-scholarship

# Schedule

## Developer Day, Wednesday, July 26

The schedule for developer day includes updates from the project,
developer 'lightning talks' highlighting recent contributions, package
development-oriented work shops, and additional activities.

## Main Conference, Thursday - Friday, July 27 - 28.

**Morning Talks** consist of 3 45-minute 'invited speaker' and 3
15-minute 'community speaker' presentations per day. Confirmed
speakers and tentative schedule include:

July 27

- [Christina Kendziorski][] (University of Wisconsin)
- [Rahul Satija][] (New York Genome Center, NYU)
- [Stephanie Hicks][] (Dana-Farber Cancer Institute)
- [Stephen Piccolo][] (Brigham Young University)
- [Nils Gehlenborg][] (Harvard Medical School)

July 28

- [Elham Azizi][] (Memorial Sloan Kettering)
- [Martin Aryee][] (Harvard)
- [Davis McCarthy][] (EBI, Cambridge, UK)
- [Raphael Gottardo][] (Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center)
- [Keegan Korthauer][] (Dana-Farber Cancer Institute)
- Jeff Gentry (Broad Institute)

[Christina Kendziorski]: https://www.biostat.wisc.edu/~kendzior/
[Stephanie Hicks]: http://www.stephaniehicks.com/
[Elli Papaemmanuil]: https://www.mskcc.org/research-areas/labs/elli-papaemmanuil
[Rahul Satija]: http://satijalab.org/
[Jeff Gentry]: https://firecloud.org
[Raphael Gottardo]: https://www.fredhutch.org/en/labs/profiles/gottardo-raphael.html
[Stephen Piccolo]: https://piccolo.byu.edu/
[Elham Azizi]: http://elhamazizi.info/
[Davis McCarthy]: https://www.ebi.ac.uk/about/people/davis-mccarthy
[Martin Aryee]: http://aryee.mgh.harvard.edu/
[Keegan Korthauer]: http://bcb.dfci.harvard.edu/~keegan/
[Nils Gehlenborg]: http://gehlenborg.com/

**Birds-of-a-feather** provide an informal, non-commercial
venue for attendees to discuss current topics of mutual interest
within the _Bioconductor_ community. BOF sessions place a strong
emphasis on audience-driven discussion, professional networking and
grassroots participation.

July 26 Developer Day

- Interfaces for programming with data: making _Bioconductor_ software
  more analyst-friendly.
- Infrastructure for efficient storage and processing of large-scale
  single-cell genomics data (Developer-focused).

July 27 (Lunch)

- Infrastructure for efficient storage and processing of large-scale
  single-cell genomics data (User-focused).
- Teaching/training using _Bioconductor_ packages.

July 28 (Lunch)

- Analyzing publicly available cancer genomics data from GTEx and TCGA
  with _Bioconductor_.

**Afternoon workshops** consist of four parallel 1.5 hour workshops;
participants choose 1 workshop per time slot. *Tentative* titles and
schedules are as follows.

July 27, 1:30 - 3:00

- Introduction to _R_ and _Bioconductor_.
- A Journey of Discovery through the GenomicRanges Infrastructure.
- Microbiome Data Analysis.
- Interactive visualization and Data Analysis with epiviz web components.

July 27, 3:30 - 5:00

- Differential Gene Expression analysis using _R_ / _Bioconductor_.
- Functional enrichment analysis of high-throughput omics data in
  _Bioconductor_.
- Design and evaluate guide RNAs for CRISPR-Cas9 genome-editing using
  CRISPRseek and GUIDEseq.
- Learn to leverage 70,000 human RNA-seq samples for your projects.

July 28, 1:30 - 3:00

- Understanding _Bioconductor_ Annotation Packages.
- _Bioconductor_ workflow for single-cell RNA-seq data analysis:
  dimensionality reduction, clustering, and pseudotime ordering.
- Integrative analysis workshop with TCGAbiolinks and ELMER.
- CyTOF workflow: differential discovery in high-throughput
  high-dimensional cytometry datasets.

July 28, 3:30 - 5:00

- Ensemble gene set enrichment analysis with *EGSEA*.
- Variant Annotation Workshop with FunciVAR, StateHub and MotifBreakR.
- Integrated analysis and visualization of ChIP-seq data using
  ChIPpeakAnno, GeneNetworkBuilder and TrackViewer.
- Working effectively with multi-omics data.

**End-of-day social** including [contributed posters][posters] (July 27).

## Birds-of-a-feather descriptions

- Interfaces for programming with data: making _Bioconductor_ software
  more analyst-friendly. Audience: package developers and users. _Bioconductor_
  packages have multiple types of users. Most use packages to analyze
  their data. Some of them access packages through GUIs like Shiny
  applications, but most access is programmatic. Developers are also
  users, in that they develop packages on top of existing
  packages. Thus, the API of a package has to serve two roles: data
  analysis and software integration. Mostly for the sake of
  integration, we formally define our data structures in specialized
  classes. The benefits of an integrated, semantically-rich platform
  justify the complexity of specialization, abstraction, polymorphism,
  etc. However, this forces the analyst to think more like an engineer
  and less like an analyst. Beyond APIs and GUIs, is there room for a
  third type of interface, a data programming interface (DPI)? How
  would that relate to the fluent APIs of the so-called tidyverse?
  S4Vectors, IRanges, GenomicRanges Michael Lawrence Genentech

- Teaching/training using _Bioconductor_ packages. Audience: people who teach
  others to use BioC packages. Do you teach others to use _Bioconductor_
  packages, either in workshops or classes? If so, please come join us
  to network, share ideas and discuss issues related to teaching. Do
  you write all your own material, primarily use _Bioconductor_’s Course
  and Conference materials, or a mix of both? What topics/packages do
  you teach, to what depth, and who is the intended audience? How is
  your time for preparing and teaching compensated? We will have an
  online survey to collate everyone’s information that we will share
  amongst ourselves, and talk about publicly posting it on
  _Bioconductor_’s website. We can also have a short discussion about
  the feasibility of developing a Intro to _Bioconductor_ module for
  Data Carpentry's Genomics Workshop. http://bioconductor.org/help/
  Jenny Drnevich University of Illinois Radhika Khetani, Harvard
  T.H. Chan School of Public Health

- Analyzing publicly available cancer genomics data from GTEx and TCGA
  with _Bioconductor_ TCGA/GTEx. Audience: researchers. This
  birds-of-a-feather would address the following: a) where to get GTEx
  and TCGA data from (websites, _Bioconductor_ packages, annotation,
  ...); b) reading data into R c) sub-setting the data to what you
  want (e.g., specific cancer type from SummarizedExperiments) d) what
  questions can be asked now?  Example: Common question is what genes
  are differentially expressed in Normal Prostate vs Prostate Cancer
  Samples.  i) are there are any batch effects since we are getting
  data from 2 sources ? Correct for batch effects ii) Differential
  Expression Analysis of Normal Samples and Cancer Samples in prostate
  cancer.  iii) Using the differentially expressed genes to do a go
  enrichment analysis, pathway enrichment analysis using _Bioconductor_
  tools.  Packages: getting GTEx/TCGA data, yarn/ recount,
  TCGAbiolinks; annotations, AnnotationHub; DE analysis, DESeq2;
  enrichment analysis, clusterProfiler. Sonali Arora Fred Hutchinson
  Cancer Research Center, Seattle.

- Infrastructure for efficient storage and processing of large-scale
  single-cell genomics data. Audience: Developers and users of
  single-cell packages. Emerging high-throughput technologies in
  single-cell transcriptomics have allowed expression profiles to be
  rapidly generated for each of thousands of cells in a sample. This
  provides unprecedented resolution to investigate cellular
  heterogeneity within complex populations, for studying biological
  processes such as cell fate choice, immune activation and tumour
  diversity. Rigorous analysis of these data requires the application
  of appropriate statistical methodologies, many of which are
  available in packages from the _Bioconductor_ project. However, the
  computational analyses are often complicated by a number of
  factors. The first is the suboptimal interoperability between
  packages that are currently available for single-cell RNA-seq data
  analysis, as each package defines its own S4 classes to be used for
  further processing. Another problem is the size of the data sets
  involved - even a simple experiment contains expression values for
  thousands of genes in thousands of cells. Finally, there is little
  support for multi-omics analyses of single-cell data, relevant to
  situations where multiple types of data (e.g., transcriptomics,
  genomics and methylation) are available for each cell. This
  birds-of-a-feather session will address these issues by proposing
  (i) a common S4 class for storing single-cell transcriptomics data,
  which extends existing _Bioconductor_ classes with slots specific to
  single-cell studies; (ii) developing a C++ API for efficient
  handling of large single-cell data sets, using sparse and
  disk-backed matrices; and (iii) investigating avenues through which
  multi-omics data can be handled for integrative analyses. scater
  scran MAST scone monocle Davide Risso Division of Biostatistics and
  Epidemiology, Weill Cornell Medical College Aaron Lun (CRUK
  Cambridge Institute) Davis McCarthy (EMBL-EBI) Peter Hickey (Johns
  Hopkins University) Stephanie Hicks (Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
  Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health) Andrew McDavid
  (University of Rochester Medical Center)

## Workshop descriptions

Each entry includes title, intendend audience, description, and contributors.

- Introduction to R and _Bioconductor_. Beginner. The Introduction to R
  / _Bioconductor_ workshop is designed as a brief overview of
  _Bioconductor_ and some of the core packages.  Depending on
  participates' background and experience with R and _Bioconductor_, the
  workshop will touch upon basic R concepts, overview of what is
  _Bioconductor_, and briefly summarize some standard _Bioconductor_
  packages like Biostrings, GenomicRanges, GenomicAlignment,
  VariantAnnotation, and Annotation Resources like org, TxDb, and
  AnnotationHub. This workshop will give a taste of what _Bioconductor_
  has to offer.  Lori Shepherd (Roswell Park Cancer Institute).

- A Journey of Discovery through the GenomicRanges
  Infrastructure. Intermediate. We will introduce the fundamental
  concepts underlying the GenomicRanges package and related
  infrastructure. After a structured introduction, we will freely
  explore the infrastructure, from the central data structures of
  GRanges and SummarizedExperiment to the murky depths, driven by
  attendee questions and interests. Topics will include data
  import/export, computing and summarizing data on genomic features,
  overlap detection, integration with reference annotations, scaling
  strategies, and visualization. By the end of the journey, we hope to
  arrive at a more holistic understanding of the underpinnings of
  _Bioconductor_. Michael Lawrence (Genentech).

- Microbiome Data Analysis. Intermediate. _Bioconductor_ provides
  significant resources for microbiome data acquisition, analysis, and
  visualization. This workshop introduces ExperimentHub, a recent
  platform for cloud-based distribution of curated experimental data
  to the _Bioconductor_ session, and curatedMetagenomicData, a resource
  providing uniformly processed taxonomic and metabolic function
  profiles for more than 5,000 whole metagenome shotgun sequencing
  samples from 26 publicly available studies, including the Human
  Microbiome Project, along with curated participant data. It
  demonstrates analysis of these data using the dada2, phyloseq, and
  metagenomeSeq packages for denoising, estimating differential
  abundance, alpha and beta diversities, ordinations, and other
  aspects of microbiome data analysis, and the metavizr package for
  browsing and visualizing microbiome profiles. Together, these
  packages provide easily linked components for data acquisition and
  flexible analysis of 16S rRNA and whole metagenome shotgun
  microbiome profiles. At the end of this workshop, users will be able
  to access publicly available metagenomic data and to perform common
  statistical analyses of these and other data in _Bioconductor_. Levi
  Waldron (CUNY School of Public Health), Susan Holmes (Stanford
  University), Paul J. McMurdie (University of Washington), Edoardo
  Pasolli (University of Trento), Joe Paulson (Dana-Farber Cancer
  Institute), Lucas Schiffer (CUNY School of Public Health), Justin
  Wagner (University of Maryland).

- Interactive visualization and Data Analysis with epiviz web
  components. Intermediate. This workshop will go over how to include
  interactive visualizations of genomic data in R markdown pages using
  epiviz web components. Epiviz web components are a new addition to
  the epiviz framework to support visualization of genomic data across
  various platforms and applications. We will demonstrate how to use
  our components to visualize data using plots or track based chart
  components, visualizing data from multiple regions at the same time
  on the same page using navigation component and enable brushing
  across all the charts using the environment component. At the end of
  the workshop, users will be able to setup the necessary libraries
  required to use epiviz web components, load data from R, generate
  interactive html pages from R markdown with epiviz components. We
  will also introduce users to setting up and using epiviz desktop
  application with _R_ / _Bioconductor_ epivizr package. This workshop is
  for intermediate users who want to perform exploratory data analysis
  using existing bioconductor infrastructure and quickly visualize
  genomic data and share their visualizations with other
  users. Jayaram Kancherla (University of Maryland, College Park),
  Hector Corrada Bravo (UMD), Brian Gottfried (UMD).

- Differential Gene Expression analysis using _R_ / _Bioconductor_.
  Intermediate. We will cover basic steps in gene-level differential
  expression analysis starting with count data generated from an
  RNA-seq experiment. These analysis steps will be performed using
  _Bioconductor_ packages, and will include exploratory analysis,
  visualization and differential expression testing.  Radhika Khetani,
  Meeta Mistry, Mary Piper (Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public
  Health)

- CyTOF workflow: differential discovery in high-throughput
  high-dimensional cytometry datasets. Intermediate. High dimensional
  mass and flow cytometry (HDCyto) experiments have become a method of
  choice for high throughput interrogation and characterization of
  cell populations. Here, we present an R-based pipeline for
  differential analyses of HDCyto data, largely based on _Bioconductor_
  packages. We computationally define cell populations using FlowSOM
  clustering, and facilitate an optional but reproducible strategy for
  manual merging of algorithm-generated clusters. Our workflow offers
  different analysis paths, including association of cell type
  abundance with a phenotype or changes in signaling markers within
  specific subpopulations, or differential analyses of aggregated
  signals. Importantly, the differential analyses we show are based on
  regression frameworks where the HDCyto data is the response; thus,
  we are able to model arbitrary experimental designs, such as those
  with batch effects, paired designs and so on. In particular, we
  apply generalized linear mixed models to analyses of cell population
  abundance or cell-population-specific analyses of signaling markers,
  allowing overdispersion in cell count or aggregated signals across
  samples to be appropriately modeled. To support the formal
  statistical analyses, we encourage exploratory data analysis at
  every step, including quality control (e.g. multi-dimensional
  scaling plots), reporting of clustering results (dimensionality
  reduction, heatmaps with dendrograms) and differential analyses
  (e.g. plots of aggregated signals). This workflow was recently
  published as a [preprint][cytof-workshop-preprint] in the
  F1000Research _Bioconductor_ gateway.  **Expected outcomes:**
  Following this workshop, participants will be able to perform
  complete R-based differential analyses of HDCyto (CyTOF and
  high-dimensional flow cytometry) data, making use of several
  _Bioconductor_ packages. Key steps include pre-processing and
  transformation, clustering, dimensionality reduction, and
  differential testing. Throughout the pipeline, we emphasize
  exploratory data analysis and visualization techniques to facilitate
  quality control and interpretation. R code for the full workflow
  will be provided and demonstrated on an example data set during the
  workshop. This will ensure that, after the workshop, participants
  can adapt and extend the code and workflow to analyze their own
  experimental data sets.  **Interactive exercises:** The workshop
  will contain optional interactive exercises to step through the
  workflow from the paper. Users will be asked to perform small tasks
  such as changes to some of the plots, transformation adjustment,
  dimensionality reduction e.g. principal component analysis (PCA),
  and clustering into varying number of groups. The exercises aim to
  show how robust the proposed methods are and how the different
  analysis strategies may affect the results.  **Prerequisites:**
  Participants should have intermediate familiarity with R and
  _Bioconductor_. In particular, participants should know how to install
  and load _Bioconductor_ packages; import and export data from saved
  files (e.g. in .csv, .txt, or .fcs format); and create plots
  (preferably using "ggplot2"). Participants should also have basic
  familiarity with HDCyto (CyTOF and/or high-dimensional flow
  cytometry) experiments and data analysis techniques (e.g. have
  previously analyzed a CyTOF or FACS data set using either gating or
  automated methods). Intermediate familiarity with statistical
  methods (especially mixed models) will also be useful, but is not
  required. Malgorzata Nowicka, Lukas M. Weber, Mark D. Robinson
  (University of Zurich).

- Functional enrichment analysis of high-throughput omics data in
  _Bioconductor_. Intermediate. This workshop will give an overview of
  existing methods and implementations for enrichment analysis of
  functional gene groups such as gene sets, pathways, and networks.
  Participants will be introduced to statistical theory of frequently
  used gene set testing methods, emphasizing on underlying differences
  in hypotheses and individual limitations.  Hands-on examples will be
  carried out using a selection of established _Bioconductor_ packages
  shown to work well in practice.  This workshop will equip
  participants with functionality for data preparation, preprocessing,
  differential expression analysis, set- and network-based enrichment
  analysis, along with visualization and exploration of results for
  gene expression data.  Finally, the workshop will provide an outlook
  on current developments to extend gene set enrichment analysis for
  data derived from multiple high-throughput omics assays.  Specific
  prior knowledge is not needed, but basic skills in data manipulation
  with R are beneficial. Ludwig Geistlinger, Levi Waldron (CUNY School
  of Public Health).

- Learn to leverage 70,000 human RNA-seq samples for your
  projects. Beginner. The recount2 project re-processed RNA sequencing
  (RNA-seq) data on over 70,000 human RNA-seq samples spanning a
  variety of tissues, cell types and disease conditions. Researchers
  can easily access these data via the `recount` _Bioconductor_ package,
  and can quickly import gene, exon, exon-exon junction and base-pair
  coverage data for uniformly processed data from the SRA, GTEx and
  TCGA projects in R for analysis. This workshop will cover different
  use cases of the `recount` package, including downloading and
  normalizing data, processing and cleaning relevant phenotype data,
  performing differential expression (DE) analyses, and creating
  reports for exploring the results using other _Bioconductor_
  packages. The workshop will also cover how to use the base-pair
  coverage data for annotation-agnostic DE analyses and for
  visualizing coverage data for features of interest. After taking
  this workshop, attendees will be ready to enhance their analyses by
  leveraging RNA-seq data from 70,000 human samples.
  [recount2 website](https://jhubiostatistics.shinyapps.io/recount/),
  [recount package](http://bioconductor.org/packages/recount),
  [paper](http://www.nature.com/nbt/journal/v35/n4/full/nbt.3838.html).
  Topic: RNA-seq Expected outcomes: Learn how to search projects,
  download data, explore the metadata, add more phenotype information,
  and prepare the data for a DE analysis. Then perform the DE analysis
  with `DESeq2` and explore the results using `regionReport`.
  Participant prerequisites: basic familiarity with packages such as
  `GenomicRanges` and `DESeq2`. Functions from those packages used in
  the workshop will be briefly described.  Leonardo Collado Torres
  (Lieber Institute for Brain Development).

- Understanding _Bioconductor_ Annotation Packages. Intermediate. There
  are various annotation packages provided by the _Bioconductor_ project
  that can be used to incorporate additional information to results
  from high-throughput experiments. This can be as simple as mapping
  Ensembl IDs to corresponding HUGO gene symbols, to much more complex
  queries involving multiple data sources.  In this workshop we will
  cover the various classes of annotation packages, what they contain,
  and how to use them efficiently.  Participants are expected to have
  some familiarity with R and _Bioconductor_. James MacDonald
  (University of Washington).

- _Bioconductor_ workflow for single-cell RNA-seq data analysis:
  dimensionality reduction, clustering, and pseudotime ordering
  Intermediate Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) is a powerful
  and promising class of high-throughput assays that enables
  researchers to measure genome-wide transcription levels for
  individual cells. To properly account for features specific to
  scRNA-seq, such as zero inflation and high levels of technical
  noise, several novel statistical methods have been developed. The
  aim of this workshop is to walk participants through a scRNA-seq
  data analysis workflow, from the raw gene-level count data to
  clustering and the inference of cell lineages. The workflow has
  three main steps, where, for each of the steps, we use a different R
  package (to be submitted or already on _Bioconductor_).
  
  First, we present Zero-Inflated Negative Binomial-based Wanted
  Variation Extraction (ZINB-WaVE), a general and flexible framework
  for normalization, dimensionality reduction, and differential
  expression analysis (R software package zinbwave). The method is
  based on a ZINB model that accounts specifically for zero inflation
  (dropouts), over-dispersion, and the count nature of the data. The
  inclusion of both known and unknown cell-level covariates in the
  model for the ZI probability and the NB mean allows for supervised
  and unsupervised normalization.  Second, we present a
  resampling-based sequential ensemble clustering (RSEC) method
  (_Bioconductor_ R package clusterExperiment) for identifying stable
  and tight cell clusters. The method aggregates multiple clustering
  results obtained from different base clustering algorithms and
  applications of a given algorithm to resampled versions of the
  learning set.  Third, we demonstrate how to use the R software
  package slingshot to infer branching lineages and order cells by
  developmental progression. We connect the clusters identified by
  RSEC with a minimum spanning tree to learn the global lineage
  structure. Then we refine this structure and order cells using
  highly stable simultaneous principal curves to infer smooth,
  branching lineages.
  
  The workflow will be illustrated using data from a scRNA-seq study
  of stem cell differentiation in the mouse olfactory epithelium.
  Fanny Perraudeau (Division of Biostatistics, School of Public
  Health, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA), Kelly Street
  (Division of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, University of
  California, Berkeley, CA, USA) Davide Risso (Division of
  Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Department of Healthcare Policy and
  Research, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA) Sandrine Dudoit
  (Division of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, University of
  California, Berkeley, CA, USA and Department of Statistics,
  University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA) Elizabeth Purdom
  (Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley, CA,
  USA).

- Integrative analysis Workshop with TCGAbiolinks and ELMER.
  Intermediate. The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), The Encyclopedia of
  DNA Elements (ENCODE), and The NIH Roadmap Epigenomics Mapping
  Consortium (Roadmap) and other organized international consortia
  have led the explosion of sequencing based biological data and
  thereby have provided unprecedented access to the largest publicly
  available genomic, transcriptomic and epigenomic data to date.
  These projects have provided amazing opportunities for researchers
  to interrogate the epigenome of cultured cancer cell lines, normal
  and tumor fresh tissues with high genomic resolution. However, the
  use of such data in analyzes, comprises the arduous task of
  searching, downloading and processing them in a reproducible
  manner. Furthermore, most bioinformatics tools are designed for
  specific data types (e.g. expression, epigenetics, genomics) which
  provides only a partial view of the biological process that takes
  place.  Performing an integrated analysis of molecular datasets
  along with clinical information, has been shown to improve the
  prognostic and predictive accuracy for cancer phenotypes if compared
  to clinical features alone. This workshop will focus on helping
  researchers to perform an integrative analysis of both molecular and
  clinical data available through the TCGA by harnessing open source
  packages within the bioconductor platform.  Participants will learn
  to search and download DNA methylation (epigenetic) and gene
  expression (transcription) data from the newly created NCI Genomic
  Data Commons (GDC) portal and prepare them into a Summarized
  Experiment object. We will introduce the workflow using our recently
  developed TCGAbiolinks and if time permitted, we will highlight the
  Graphics User Interface version (TCGAbiolinksGUI).  Another
  bioconductor package will also be introduced called ELMER which
  allows one to identify DNA methylation changes in distal regulatory
  regions and correlate these signatures with expression of nearby
  genes to identify transcriptional targets associated with
  cancer. For these distal probes correlated with a gene, a
  transcription factor motif analysis is performed followed by
  expression analysis of transcription factors to infer upstream
  regulators.  We expect that participants of this workshop will
  understand the integrative analysis performed by using
  TCGAbiolinks + ELMER, as well as be able to execute it from the data
  acquisition process to the final interpretation of the results. The
  workshop assumes users with an intermediate level of familiarity
  with R, and basic understanding of tumor biology.  Tiago Chedraoui
  Silva (University of São Paulo / Cedars-Sinai), Houtan Noushmehr
  (University of São Paulo/Henry Ford Health System) Benjamin Berman
  (Cedars-Sinai)

- Design and evaluate guide RNAs for CRISPR-Cas9 genome-editing uing
  CRISPRseek and GUIDEseq. Beginner. The most recently developed
  genome editing system, CRISPR-Cas9 has greater inherent flexibility
  than prior programmable nuclease platforms. Because of its
  simplicity and efficacy, this technology is revolutionizing
  biological studies and holds tremendous promise for therapeutic
  applications. However, imperfect cleavage specificity of CRISPR-Cas9
  nuclease within the genome is a cause for concern for its
  therapeutic application. To facilitate the adoption and improvement
  of this technology, we have developed CRISPRseek for designing
  target specific gRNAs, and GUIDEseq for identifying genome-wide
  offtarget sites from GUIDE-seq experiments to assess the precision
  of engineered CIRSPR-Cas9 nucleases. In this workshop, I will give
  an introduction to the CRISPR genome editing and GUIDE-seq
  technology, followed by a practical hands-on session using
  CRISPRseek and GUIDEseq. By the end of workshop, the participants
  should be able to design target-specific gRNAs for various cas9
  nucleases and genomes using CRISPRseek, and analyze GUIDE-seq data
  using GUIDEseq. Lihua Julie Zhu (University of Massachusetts Medical
  School).

- Ensemble gene set enrichment analysis with *EGSEA*. Beginner. Many
  tools exist for gene set testing, and choosing the best method for a
  given RNA-sequencing/microarray data set is a challenge. The *EGSEA*
  software overcomes this problem by performing gene set testing using
  an ensemble approach that combines results from many different
  algorithms. *EGSEA* uses the voom method to process RNA-sequencing
  data and, where applicable, a linear model analysis with pair-wise
  comparisons of interest is applied. It then combines the results
  obtained from the many methods available in the _Bioconductor_
  project, that include camera, roast, fry, safe, gage, padog, plage,
  zscore, gsva, ssgsea, globaltest and ora to get a consensus.  This
  workshop will provide an overview of the functionality of the
  *EGSEA* package via a workflow that demonstrates how *EGSEA* can be
  applied to both RNA-sequencing and microarray data profiling mouse
  mammary gland epithelial cell populations. It will introduce the
  large collection of gene signatures *EGSEA* can easily test and
  explore the detailed reporting options for gene set analysis results
  *EGSEA* provides via an html report that can be shared with
  collaborators. The biological relevance of the results obtained
  using *EGSEA*’s ensemble approach will be also highlighted. Matt
  Ritchie (Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research).

- Variant Annotation Workshop with FunciVAR, StateHub and MotifBreakR.
  Intermediate. Variant annotation is a critical step in evaluating
  the potential function of variants identified from whole-genome
  sequencing studies, GWAS and other next-generation sequencing
  technologies. In the proposed workshop, we will survey and review
  the capabilities of a suite of tools from the _Bioconductor_
  universe. During the workshop, participants will learn how to
  identify public datasets from ROADMAP, IHEC, Blueprint or ENCODE,
  download them and produce integrated chromatin state annotations
  using _StateHub_ and _StatePaintR_. Participants will also be
  exposed to creating their own annotation models using the StateHub
  resource. Then, we will use the _FunciVAR_ package to integrate a
  set of biologically interesting variants and assess them for
  biological enrichment, including some discussion of how to pick an
  appropriate background distribution. Finally participants will use
  _MotifBreakR_ to predict potential motif disruptions with a set of
  variants. Participants need basic knowledge of R and _Bioconductor_
  data structures, and some working knowledge of ChIP-seq or general
  NGS experiments and data as these topics will not be covered.
  Dennis J Hazelett (Cedars-Sinai Medical Center), Simon G Coetzee.

- Integrated analysis and visualization of ChIP-seq data using
  ChIPpeakAnno, GeneNetworkBuilder and
  TrackViewer. Intermediate. Chromatin immuno-precipitation followed
  by DNA sequencing (ChIP-seq) has become the most prevalent high
  throughput technology for the genome-wide identification of the
  binding sites of transcription factors and histone modification. In
  this workshop, attendants will gain knowledge and hands-on
  experiences on analyzing ChIP-seq dataset using several _Bioconductor_
  packages such as ChIPpeakAnno, GeneNetorkBuilder and
  TrackViewer. Participants are welcome to analyze their own dataset
  or a published ChIP-seq data set.  Participant must know how to use
  _R_ / _Bioconductor_, including how to install R, install _Bioconductor_
  packages. Familiar with the format of deep-sequencing files, such as
  fastq, sam and bam.  Jianhong Ou, Julie Zhu, Jun Yu (University of
  Massachusetts Medical School).

- Working effectively with multi-omics data. Intermediate. Levi
  Waldron (CUNY School of Public Health).

[cytof-workshop-preprint]: https://f1000research.com/articles/6-748/v1.

# Call for proposals

## Birds-of-a-feather

Due June 1; applications closed.

New this year! _Bioconductor_ builds and maintains communities with
interests in analysis and comprehension of high-throughput genomic
data. To that end, we introduce **Birds-of-a-Feather** (BOF) sessions
to provide an informal, non-commercial venue for attendees to discuss
current topics of mutual interest within the _Bioconductor_
community. BOF sessions place a strong emphasis on audience-driven
discussion, professional networking and grassroots participation. BOF
sessions are informal, and will be scheduled during lunch and other
social periods.

BOF applications that include ideas for development or education, or
address scientific questions at a community level are strongly
encouraged. We encourage BOF leaders to aim at synthesizing results in
a way that contributes to long-term community development (e.g., an
F1000Research review or _Bioconductor_ workflow; a working group
focusing on development and use of relevant software, etc.)

After the session, BOF leader willl submit a brief (<1 page) summary
of the BOF session, together with a roster of attendees.

## Workshops

Due June 1; applications closed.

Workshops provide participants with excellent hands-on opportunities
to learn how to use _Bioconductor_ packages for rigorous statistical
analysis of genomic data. Workshops last for 1.5 hours and target
beginning and intermediate _R_ users. Workshop leaders will have
prepared course material in advance, typically as an _R_ /
_Bioconductor_ package containing a vignette with activities and
exercises to guide users through the material. _Bioconductor_ makes
the package and supporting material available on Amazon machine
instances during the conference. Participants connect to the AMI to
work through the material during the workshop.

## Posters

Due: July 15

[Apply to contribute a poster][apply-poster].

[workshop-proposal]: #workshops
[poster-proposal]: #posters
[birds-of-a-feather]: #birds-of-a-feather
[apply-workshop]: https://www.surveymonkey.com/r/bioc-workshop
[apply-bof]: https://www.surveymonkey.com/r/bioc-bof
[apply-poster]: https://www.surveymonkey.com/r/X9DNMWW
